Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
The lessons this week pick up
where we left off last week
and continue exploring key
features of the Java Streams
framework.
Our initial focus centers
on terminal operations
supported by Java
Streams, which differ
from intermediate
operations in several ways.
First, each stream
must have one and only
one terminal
operation, although it
can have zero or more
intermediate operations.
Second, a terminal
operation always
yields a non-stream
result. Whereas
an intermediate operation always
yields a stream result. Third,
intermediate operations are
lazy since their behaviors don't
actually run until the terminal
operation in the stream
is reached.
One terminal operation
we cover this week
is collect, which
uses a collector
to perform a reduction on the
elements in its input stream,
and it returns the result of the
reduction, which is typically
stored into a Java collection.
Another terminal
operation we cover
is reduce, which performs
a reduction on the stream
and returns a primitive value,
such as a long or integer.
The collect and reduce methods
have important differences.
In particular, collect updates
immutable result container
during its reduction,
whereas reduce
creates immutable values
that should not be
modified after they're created.
We next present
the visualization
and implementation of several
simple search stream program
methods that print the locations
of all words identified
in a string initialized
from a file.
These methods apply various
intermediate and terminal
operations, such as dropWhile,
[? mapped ?] [? int, ?]
collect, and max.
The final lessons this week
explore key differences
between external iteration
and internal iteration,
which are two iteration
styles supported by Java.
External iteration
is used by Java's
object-oriented iteration
mechanisms, such as for-loops,
forEach loops, and
implementations of the iterator
interface, which are
often used to iterate
through Java collections.
In contrast, aggregate
operations in a Java Stream
pipeline iterate internally.
Internal iterators
have several advantages
over external iterators
because they're
declarative rather
than imperative,
which enables programmers to
focus on what operations are
being performed
during the iteration,
rather than on how each
iteration step is performed.
This focus on what versus how
also enables the Java Streams
framework to optimize
the processing pipeline.
For example,
aggregate operations
can run transparently
in parallel
on the available
processor cores.